# <u> Paper title </u>: “The use of Music Programming in Music Education as a new teaching music method and its benefits”

## <u> Authors </u>: <em> Sophia Emmanouilidou, Iannis Zannos </em>

*This paper argues that composers/musicians/performers and, therefore, music teachers would be well advised to try to assimilate existing technological developments through the use of music programming. We consider as a candidate tool for this purpose SuperCollider. The article focuses on the use of SuperCollider in music practice and education and more specifically on the benefits of using code to explain concepts known from acoustics, music mathematics and digital sound processing in order to improve our understanding of the nature of musical sound. We propose a method based on finding, selecting examples of code and adapting and combining them with free experimentation in an improvisational manner. The process described can be seen as a specific learning activity applied to music and digital technology (Kuutti, 1996). Programming music with SuperCollider can be time-consuming because this programming environment offers many alternative ways to define musical and sound structures and to create interactive audio applications. Therefore, we emphasize the role of code reuse, i.e., adapting existing code examples to create new ones, as a tool to enrich the musical programming vocabulary (Plass et al., 2015). We examine how such examples can be found on the web and how they are adapted for educational and creative purposes. The experiences gained from experimenting with SuperCollider have given us convincing evidence that musical programming can open the door to musical creativity and exploration, and have given us a first insight into the potential of free open source software in education and artistic creation.*

## <u> Key words </u> : Music Education, Music Programming, SuperCollider, Compositional Practices, Music Technology

# 1. What is the context of Μusic Εducation nowadays

The curriculum of Music Education nowadays still focuses only on advancing on an music instrument and/or music theory. The lesson of music in general education schools (kindergarten, primary school, secondary school) mainly comes to equip students with a basic knowledge of music. In particular, music lessons in the aforementioned institutions deal with such issues as reading music in the key of G, music games-exercises and elementary knowledge of music history.

Music courses in conservatories mainly focus on the specialisation on a musical instrument or music theory (basic music theory, harmony, counterpoint, fugue and composition). Some conservatories also offer courses in music technology, but these are mainly concerned with music production and mixing.

The latter case is the same in most institutes of higher education such as music universities as well as vocational training institutes where music technology courses are offered with the same content.

Despite the fact that digital technology is a part of our everyday life we are still very skeptical about its use in music education. This ignorance can be considered as a hindrance to creativity and to the needs of our music society nowadays.

# 2. The parameters and conditions of Μusic Εducation with Τechnology today

Αs a student and then as a music teacher in various institutions (Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Ionian University, Ano's Polis Concervatoire, PIVT institutions etc) I examined the curriculum in music education with technology today and made the following observations:

<u> Music Technology in today's curriculum consists on the below subjects:</u>
- use of a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) software (Ableton, Cubase or Logic mostly)
- Use of Sound Effects on DAWs
- Use of EQ (Equalization) on DAWs
- Audio Interface of Sound Cards and Converters
- ADC (Analog to Digital Convertion) and vice versa
- Audio Editing & Audio Restoration Software
- DJing Software
- MIDI protocol
- Mastering of Audio on DAWs
- Mix and Mastering
- Auxilaries and Routing
- Monitoring
- Noise Cancelation
- Recording processing
- Explanation of various microphones and their use
- Synthesizers
- Samplers

<u>In the above list I miss the following subjects:</u>
- Music Programming
- Physics of sound
- Signal Processing with code
- Interactive Sound Systems
- Various Sensors
- Arduino and Raspberry Pi
- Processing analysis mindset
- Data processing
- Interactive Programming
- Live coding
- Acoustic Research
- Algorithmic Music

In the above curriculum we notice a clear focus on music production. Music production is the first step for one to understand the concept of music technology in terms of its economic and professional impact. However there exists another aspect of music technology besides its immediate application. Music programming is one of the most important factors that one should study in order to become more immersed in music technology. Engaging in music programming offers more benefits to the music student because it provides fundamental knowledge that is applicable to a wide variety of situations and contexts.

Although digital technology has invaded our everyday life, knowledge of its principles is very limited amongst musicians. Music programming can broad our horizons in many and various aspects.

# 3. What is Music Programming and questions for why to use it in Music Education and Sound Education

Music programming is the process in which a musician produces a sound or patch (McCartney, 2002). Music programming can be considered as a form of music production and performance using electronic devices and computer software so as to generate sounds of musical instruments (Magnusson, n.d.) or create his/her one.

Music programming affects both the process of composing/performing music itself and our understanding of the musical experience itself. Music education and thus music theory derives from the needs of music practices (performance and composition) in our fast-paced society.

Before examining how music programming contributes to music education and sound education we should set certain questions. Some of these question may seem trivial at first glance, but on further examination are rather deep. The following questions fit this category. What are the topics of music performance nowadays? Ηow to use music technology in music performances? What is to gain by the use of music programming in music performances? How we can use music programming in music theory and composition?

This paper claims that the SuperCollider IDE is a good tool for this purpose. In the following chapters (4,5) we will answer the aforementioned questions and see how SuperCollider fits in. Possible perspectives for the use of SuperCollider in music education and sound education will also be examined in chapter 7.

# 4. What is SuperCollider

The whole concept of this paper is based on my personal experience learning how to use new technological advances in music performances and music education. We consider as a candidate tool for this purpose SuperCollider, a free open source software that is one of the most sophisticated and complete programming environments for sound and music. SuperCollider is an environment and programming language for real-time audio synthesis and algorithmic composition (McCartney, n.d.). It was launched by James McCartney in 1996. Since 2003 SuperCollider is a fully open-source project and is further developed by a community of programmers. SuperCollider is a dynamic programming language and provides a framework for acoustic research, algorithmic music, interactive programming and live coding (McCartney, 2002). Considering the above, one can easily understand that this environment opens up rich possibilities for new sounds and musical structures. This is vital for a composer/musician/performer living in today’s fast-paced society.

# 5. The advantages of the use of SuperCollider in Music Education and Sound Education

Due to the fact that SuperCollider is an open-source IDE and there is an evolving community around it one can easily find tutorials of its use and pre-existing examples of code that correspond to one's needs.

Music performances as well as composition techniques are centered on the sound itself and the alterations on its parameters. The knowledge of writing code is one of the basic principles that can contribute regarding this issue. With SuperCollider one can synthesize one's sounds from scratch (SynthDefs). Moreover, with code one can generate also sounds of musical instruments (Magnusson, n.d.). Most DAWs do not give this oppurtunity to the user. The Supercollider can also process the audio signal and mix it as DAWs do. However, in the SuperCollider this processing is done through the use of code. The general use of code introduces us to processing analysis mindset and data processing, aspects that are known in computer sciences.

It is widely known that improvisation and experimentation are key factors in the development of the arts and sciences. With SuperCollider one can experiment with code scripts that already exist on the internet as well as create one's own sounds in real time (live coding).

Moreover, SuperCollider in music practice and education can give music teachers the opportunity to explain concepts known from acoustics, music mathematics and digital sound processing in order to improve our understanding of the nature of musical sound. For example, sound parameters such as harmonics can be explained and demonstrated via SuperCollider enviroment. Furthermore, in an more advanced level, a music teacher can teach students the process of making their own interactive sound systems by connecting their created sounds to sensors and/or other hardware. Τhe involvement with programming can be beneficial for learning other subjects too such as coding, computer sciences, English language, mathematics and physics.

If the above-mentioned aspects are included to music education, a whole new world of potentials is open for exploration.

# 6. Difficulties presented by SuperCollider in education (prerequisites)

Although SuperCollider can give us many opportunities and aspects of what music is and what music can be, there are some problematics that if not surpassed it may be difficult to comprehend.

<u>These problems are listed in the following list:</u>

1. No-knowledge of English Language
2. No-knowledge of programming among music teachers and scholars
3. Lack of Equipment (Laptop, PC)
4. Lack of funding
5. Lack of time

In spite the fact that all the above mention difficulties can be also considered as prerequisites in order for one to use SuperCollider, when one posses a laptop and/or PC and is willing to overcome partially some of these difficulties e.g. one's elementary level of English, a new whole world of potentials is unlocked. Τhe confrontation with these problems can also shape a problem-solving mindset, an asset essential in our fast-paced society. In order for one to be up to date with the existing trends in music and education one should strongly consider overcoming these problems.

# 7. Model scenarios for introducing SuperCollider in Music Education

We propose the use of SuperCollider in music education in two possible ways; as a tool that is used from the music teacher or as an individual class in music technology section.

In the first case, a music teacher can use the SuperCollider environment in music theory lessons (theory, counterpoint, harmony, composition) to explain the parameters of sound. Parameters such as pitch, volume, duration, timbre and rhythm can be represented quantitatively through the use of the SuperCollider. Moreover, concepts and aspects known from music production can be used to explain the production of the sound of acoustic music instruments. For instance, one aspect is the ADSR envelope. In short, ADSR stands for the four stages of envelope configuration: attack, decay, sustain and release. These stages control the level of the sound from the moment you press a key or advance a musical sequencer. In music production and sound design, ADSR envelopes are commonly used to control the volume of the sound (Swisher, 2020).

We propose also to introduce SuperCollider as an individual course in Music Technology lessons. As it was mentioned above (chapter 2), music technology lessons have a clear focus on music production. Although this is the first step for one to familiarise with the music technology and its wide field, developing a curriculum that solely based in music production seems problematic on second thought. Students develop a mindset that music technology is only music production which is a false claim. For this reason, we propose that the integration of music programming in Music Technology lessons is essential. Engaging in music programming offers more benefits to the music student because it provides fundamental knowledge that is applicable to a wide variety of situations and contexts.

SuperCollider, which is an open-source music programming enviroment gives as the opportunity to explore many concepts and aspects of what music is and what music can be. With SuperCollider one can process the sound and its parameters in ways that are not possible in other DAWs. Also, by SuperCollider one can synthesise one's own sounds (SynthDefs). Moreover, teaching SuperCollider can be beneficial for buiding interactive sound systems, a trend of our fast-paced society that is essential to the students that study Music Technology.

# 8. Methods of teaching SuperCollider

Music Teachers in order to get familiar with music programming and specifically with the use of the SuperCollider are advised first to experiment themselves with various code scripts that they can find online. In other words, we propose a method based on finding, selecting examples of code and adapting and combining  them with free experimentation in an improvisational manner. This process is free to the discretion of the music educator and it is in accordance with the needs of the music lessons that he/she teaches. As it was mentioned in chapter 5, improvisation and experimentation are key factors in the development of the arts and sciences. The process described can be seen as a specific learning activity applied to music and digital technology (Kuutti, 1996).

With SuperCollider one can experiment with code scripts that already exist on the internet as well as create one's own sounds in real time (live coding). The adaption of existing code examples and the alternation of their parameters can enrich the musical programming vocabulary. In this way music teachers will acquire the appropriate skills and knowledge to use the Supercollider as a tool in their music lessons.

A similar procedure in specific contexts can be used by the music teacher so as to teach the use of the SuperCollider as an individual course to the children. We recomment the use of SuperCollider for children above the age of ten who already had some courses of English Language. As was noted on chapter 5, the use of SuperCollider in music education can be beneficial also for children in order to advance in other subjects such as physics, mathematics, English and coding. SuperCollider can be considered as an Interdisciplinary enviroment that combines all the former mentioned sciences together. This is a unique feature that is not offered by the common use of DAWs.

The methods decribed can be considered as try and error processes. Try and error process is essential for one in order to understand the depth of music programming. This method highlights the freedom of will of the music teachers and thus the students and also equips the participants with a problem-solving mindset. We compare the active process of try and error to activity learning (Kuutti, 1996). Moreover, we advocate that this teaching method is close to the nature of the children and the principal of play (Plass et al., 2015).

Αlthough the procedure described is time-consuming and demanding on various fields (computer and English language skills required) if one surpasses these problems a whole new world of potentials is open for exploration. Engaging in musical programming can shape the way we think and therefore the way we perceive and create music.

# 9. institutions and music schools that are willing to implement this educational scenarios

The teaching method that was described above is going to be implemented in
"Ano's Polis Concervatoire" (Ano Poli/Thessaloniki, Greece) and in
Music School "Mousiko Karavi" (Oraiokastron/Thessaloniki, Greece).

We discussed to include SuperCollider in Music Theory lessons in order to explain the aspects of sound and harmonics. We also consider to teach SuperCollider seperately as an individual music course in the following academic years. This will be depedented on the general demand of this course in the above-mentioned music institutions.

# 10. Conclusions

//

*correction starts from here*

Considering all the above we strongly advocate that music programming should be a common practise in music performance and/or music theory nowadays and should also be tought as seperately as a course to all institutions that provide music education.

This proposed method will benefit music teachers as well as music students and thus will evolve our music perception and what music can be. Needless

The experiences gained from experimenting with SuperCollider have given us convincing evidence that musical programming can open the door to musical creativity and exploration, and have given us a first insight into the potential of free open source software in education and artistic creation.


# References

1.	Magnusson, T. (n.d.). Physical Modelling | Scoring. Scoring Sound: Creative Music Coding with SuperCollider. Retrieved December 16, 2020, from https://thormagnusson.gitbooks.io/scoring/content/PartII/chapter11.html
2.	Karamanlis, O. (2021). Audio composition and editing in Supercollider IDE. Fylatos Publications. ISBN:978-960-658-088-8
3. Kuutti, K. (1996). Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer interaction research. Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction, 1744.
4. Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., & Kinzer, C. K. (2015). Foundations of game-based learning. Educational psychologist, 50(4), 258-283.
5. McCartney, J. (2002). Rethinking the Computer Music Language: SuperCollider. Computer Music Journal; 26 (4): 61–68. doi: https://doi.org/10.1162/014892602320991383
6. McCartney, J. (n.d.). SuperCollider:  a new real time synthesis language. ICMC96 Supercollider Paper. Retrieved October 28, 2022, from https://www.audiosynth.com/icmc96paper.html
7. Swisher, D. (2020). ADSR: The best kept secret of pro music producers! Musician on a Mission. Retrieved November 3, 2022, from https://www.musicianonamission.com/adsr/
